# Creational Design Pattern 

- What is creational design pattern ?

    - This system of efficient product creation is similar to Creational Design Patterns in software development. These patterns are about managing how objects are created in a software system, making it easier to build and maintain.

    - Instead of creating objects directly all over your code, creational patterns give you a smart, controlled way to handle the object creation process.

    -  They deal with the process of creating objects in a way that is flexible and reusable

    EX:- 
    You're developing a large application, and you need to create various objects – cars 🚗, trucks 🚚, and bikes 🚲 in our example. Now, each of these objects might have a different way of being created, but if you have to specify the details of their creation in every part of your code, things can get messy.

    What if you need to change how a car or a truck is created? You’d have to go through all the places in your code where these objects are created and modify them.

- What are the types of Creational Design Patterns available ?

    - Singleton 
        - The Singleton pattern makes sure there’s only one instance of a class throughout your entire system, so you don’t waste resources.
    
    - Factory Method 
        -  The Factory Method pattern allows you to delegate (give responsibility to someone else) the object creation process, while still allowing flexibility for the type of object created.

    - Abstract Factory 
        - The Abstract Factory pattern helps you organize the creation of related objects (car -> honda,BMW,Tata) by providing an interface for each family of objects, without worrying about the specifics.
    
    - Builder Factory 
        - The Builder pattern lets you break down the creation process into smaller steps, giving you more control and flexibility over the final result.
    
    - Prototype 
        - The Prototype pattern allows you to clone an object rather than recreating it from scratch, saving both time and resources.

‍
- What are the advantages of creational design patterns ?

    - Simplify the object creation 
        - Object creation code is not scattered everywhere 
    
    - Flexibility 
        - New class objects can be created with minimal disruptions by following the open and close principle 
    
    - Maintainability 
        - If you want to change the process of creation , then change only at one part of the code.